MARINO 5TH ED — CH20_ACS
Start page: 356
============================================================

--- Page 356 ---
Chapter 20
Acute Coronary Syndromes
The study of the causes of things must be preceded by the study of
things caused.
John Hughlings Jackson (1835–1911)
One of the seminal moments in cardiac critical care was the discovery (in 1980) that transmural
myocardial infarction (MI) was the result of an occlusive thrombus in a coronary artery. This led
to the introduction of thrombolytic therapy (in the mid-1980s), followed by the superseding
technology of balloon angioplasty and stent placement. Advances in reperfusion therapy have
improved outcomes, and have contributed to 20% decline in the annual mortality rate from
coronary disease over the past decade (from 2010 to 2020) (1). However, coronary artery disease
continues to be the leading cause of death in the United States (1), so there is more work to be
done.
This chapter describes the diagnosis and early management of acute myocardial infarction
and unstable angina (the acute coronary syndromes), with an emphasis on management in the
first 24–36 hours after presentation. Also included is a section on acute aortic dissection, which
has a clinical presentation that can be confused with acute coronary syndromes. Many of the
recommendations in this chapter are derived from the clinical practice guidelines listed in the
bibliography at the end of the chapter (2–7).
CORONARY THROMBOSIS
Pathogenesis
As just mentioned, acute myocardial infarction is the result of an occlusive thrombus in one or
more coronary arteries. The trigger for thrombus formation is rupture of an atherosclerotic
plaque, which releases thrombogenic lipids (see Figure 20.1). Plaque disruption is attributed to
inflammation (8), but hydraulic shear stress may also play a role, because ruptured plaques are
typically located at branch points in the coronary circulation (9).
Role of Oxidative Injury
ALGrawany
--- Page 357 ---
Inflammation plays a major role in both the genesis and rupture of atherosclerotic plaques (10).
The damaging effects of inflammation are largely due to the oxidative actions of “reactive
oxygen species”, as described in Chapter 17 (see Figure 17.1), and this implicates oxidative
injury as a major participant in coronary artery disease. The principle culprit in this scenario
appears to be myeloperoxidase (MPO), an enzyme released by leukocytes that generates
hypochlorite (the active ingredient in household bleach), and oxidizes lipoproteins in
atherosclerotic plaques (11). Clinical studies have shown a direct correlation between plasma
levels of MPO and the presence and severity of coronary artery disease (12,13), and autopsy
studies in humans have shown extensive staining for MPO at the rupture site of coronary artery
plaques (13). These observations suggest that inhibition of MPO is a potential treatment modality
for coronary artery disease.
FIGURE 20.1 Pathogenesis of acute coronary syndromes. Rupture of an atherosclerotic plaque
releases thrombogenic lipids that activate platelets and clotting factors (upper panel), resulting in
--- Page 358 ---
the formation of an occlusive thrombus (lower panel).
Clinical Syndromes
Acute coronary thrombosis produces three distinct clinical syndromes (which are the acute
coronary syndromes, or ACS), which are classified by the presence or absence of ST-segment
elevation on a 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG):
1. ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI), which is a transmural infarction caused by
complete occlusion of the infarct-related artery.
2. Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI), which is the result of incomplete or partial
occlusion of the infarct-related artery.
3. Unstable angina (UA), which is not associated with ST elevation on the ECG, and is the result
of repetitive on-off episodes of coronary occlusion.
NSTEMI and UA are typically grouped together as “non-ST-elevation acute coronary
syndromes”, or NSTE-ACS.
Diagnostic Evaluation
The success of treating ACS is time-dependent, so the diagnostic evaluation must be completed
as quickly as possible, The evaluation has three components: the clinical presentation, the 12-
lead ECG, and the high-sensitivity troponin assay.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION: The clinical presentation of ACS can vary widely, but about 80% of
patients have some type of chest discomfort (e.g., pain, pressure, tightness, etc.) (3,4). The onset
is abrupt, and lasts for longer than 15 minutes. The discomfort is a deep sensation that cannot be
localized to a specific point, and can involve the shoulders, neck, arms, and abdomen. Patients
are often apprehensive, and can complain of nausea, vomiting, and dyspnea.
ACS is unlikely when chest pain is sharp or fleeting, or can be localized to a precise point,
and also if the pain occurs during inspiration, or can be elicited by body movements or chest
percussion. Of particular note, chest pain that is relieved by nitroglycerin is not evidence of
myocardial ischemia, since nitroglycerin can also relieve chest pain from esophageal spasm
(14).
The initial evaluation may also reveal evidence of acute heart failure or cardiogenic shock.
These complications are not considered in this chapter, but are described in detail in Chapters 16
and 18.
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM: A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) should be obtained within 10 minutes
of the first patient contact (2). Some of the ECG changes in ACS are shown in Table 20.1 ECG
evidence of ST-elevation MI (STEMI) merits emergency reperfusion therapy (described later).
NSTEMI and UA (NSTE-ACS) may be accompanied by ST depressions or T-wave inversions,
but the ECG can also be normal in these conditions. Finally, ischemic changes in the ST segment
can be masked by a bundle branch block or a paced rhythm, and when coronary ischemia is
suspected, the presence of these ECG abnormalities is managed like a STEMI (i.e., with
emergent reperfusion therapy).
ALGrawany
--- Page 359 ---
TROPONIN ASSAY: Plasma levels of cardiac troponin (cTn) are used to detect the presence of
myocardial cell injury, and a high-sensitivity assay (hs-cTn) can detect elevations of plasma cTn
as early as 3 hours after the onset of symptoms (15). There are several commercial hs-cTn
assays, and the normal or reference levels differ for each assay, and can differ for each hospital.
The following protocol is recommended for hs-cTn levels (2–6).
1. Plasma levels of hs-cTn are measured at the time of presentation, and again one hour later.
2. Myocardial necrosis is likely if the initial hs-cTn level is elevated (usually above the 99%
upper reference level for the assay), and there has been at least 3 hours since the onset of
symptoms. Conditions other than ischemia can cause myocardial injury, hence a repeat hs-cTn
level at one hour is used to determine if the myocardial injury is ischemic in origin (see next).
3. A significant change (usually >10%) in the second hs-cTn level is evidence of acute ischemia
(i.e., acute MI).
There are several non-ischemic causes of elevated hs-cTn levels (e.g., cardiomyopathy, sustained
tachycardia, heart failure, pulmonary hypertension, and even sepsis) (2,3) but these conditions
should not cause an acute change in the hs-cTn levels. However, patients with markedly elevated
hs-cTn levels are usually admitted to the hospital for further testing.
TABLE 20.1 ECG Changes in Acute Coronary Syndromes
Condition Pattern Criteria
STEMI ST elevation at the J point in ≥2 contiguous leads: either ≥1.5 mm (females) or
≥2.0 mm (males) in V –V₃, or ≥1 mm in the other leads.
2
Posterior ST depression in V –V with a positive T wave.
1 3
STEMI
V – V
1 3
NSTE- J point depression ≥0.5 mm in V –V₃, or ≥1 mm in all other leads. ST segment
2
ACS can be horizontal or downsloping.
NSTE- T wave inversion >1 mm in ≥5 leads, including I, II, aVL, and V –V .
2 6
ACS
From Reference 5.
REPERFUSION STRATEGIES
When the likelihood of an acute coronary occlusion is very high using the evaluation just
described, the next step is to determine the appropriate strategy for restoring flow in the occ