MARINO 5TH ED — CH24_ARDS
Start page: 304
============================================================

--- Page 304 ---
inflammatory organ injury in critically ill patients is the acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS), which is a leading cause of acute respiratory failure that requires mechanical
ventilation. (ARDS is the focus of Chapter 24.)
TABLE 17.1 Inflammatory Organ Injury in Critically Ill Patients
Organ System Clinical Condition
Brain Septic encephalopathy
Bone Marrow Anemia of critical Illness
Circulatory System Septic shock, Anaphylactic shock
Kidneys Acute Kidney Injury
Lungs Acute respiratory distress syndrome
Peripheral Nerves Critical illness polyneuropathy
Skeletal Muscle Critical illness myopathy, Rhabdomyolysis
The morbidity and mortality associated with inflammatory organ injury is not only related to the
severity of involvement in individual organs, but also to the number of organs involved. This
latter relationship is shown in Figure 17.2, which includes surveys from the United States (14)
and Europe (15) showing a direct relationship between the mortality rate and the number of
organ failures related to inflammation.
FIGURE 17.2 The relationship between mortality rate and the number of inflammation-related
organ failures. Data from References 12 and 13.
ALGrawany
--- Page 305 ---
SEPTIC SHOCK
Sepsis is responsible for one of every 2 to 3 in-hospital deaths in the United States (16), and one
of every 5 deaths worldwide (17). The mortality rate varies by age and geographic locale: for
septic shock in the United State, the mortality rate is about 30% when it is present on admission,
and about 50% when it develops after admission (18). Despite the presumption of sepsis as
infection, the mortality rate in sepsis is not related to the causative organism, including
multidrug-resistant organisms (19). This observation is consistent with the notion that the major
problem in sepsis is not the infection, but the host response to infection (see next).
Definitions
The current definitions of sepsis and septic shock are summarized below (20).
1. Sepsis is an infection (suspected or confirmed) that is associated with life-threatening organ
dysfunction, and is the result of a dysregulated host response to infection.
2. Septic shock is a subset of sepsis that is characterized by the need for vasopressor support, and
by a plasma lactate >2 mmol/L.
These definitions were introduced in 2016, and they replaced the prior definitions established
in 1992 (21), which defined sepsis as an infection that was accompanied by a systemic
inflammatory response (i.e., fever, leukocytosis, etc.) (21), with the latter condition being
elevated to a syndrome; i.e., the “systemic inflammatory response syndrome”, or SIRS.
However, SIRS is a nonspecific finding in critically ill patients, as fewer than 50% of patients
with SIRS have a documented infection (22,23), so SIRS was abandoned as a diagnostic criterion
for sepsis. However, the definition of sepsis continues to be problematic, as explained next.
A Better Definition
The presence of infection is a central feature in the definition of sepsis and septic shock.
However, there is often no documented infection in cases of sepsis; e.g., in a survey of 2.5
million patients with sepsis and septic shock, there was no documented infection in 70% of the
cases (18). Since the clinical suspicion of infection in cases of sepsis is typically based on the
presence of a systemic inflammatory response (fever, leukocytosis, etc.), it seems likely that
sepsis is a dysregulated host response to inflammation, not infection.
Pathophysiology
Regardless of whether the sepsis is a dysregulated response to infection or inflammation, septic
shock is distinguished from sepsis by the presence of hemodynamic instability and mitochondrial
dysfunction.
Hemodynamic Alterations
The hemodynamic aberrations in septic shock are summarized below:
1. The principal hemodynamic problem is hypotension from systemic vasodilation. This has been
attributed to the enhanced production of nitric oxide by the vascular endothelium (24), but the
inactivation of nitric oxide by oxidant stress (see Equation 17.1) suggests the involvement of
--- Page 306 ---
other factors.
2. Oxidant injury in the vascular endothelium leads to fluid extravasation and hypovolemia,
which aggravates the hypotension.
3. Proinflammatory cytokines promote cardiac dysfunction (both systolic and diastolic
dysfunction), but the cardiac output is usually increased as a result of tachycardia and a
decrease in left ventricular afterload (from vasodilation) (25). The cardiac output begins to
decline in the advanced stages of shock, which carries a poor prognosis.
4. Despite the increased cardiac output, splanchnic blood flow is typically reduced in septic shock
(24). This can lead to disruption of the bowel mucosa and translocation of enteric pathogens
into the systemic circulation, which aggravates the problem.
Because of the high cardiac output and peripheral vasodilation, septic shock is also known as
hyperdynamic shock or warm shock.
Mitochondrial Dysfunction
The organ dysfunction in sepsis and septic shock is attributed to a defect in the production of
high-energy ATP molecules in mitochondria (26,27). This condition is attributed to oxidative
damage in the electron transport chain (28), and to cytokine-mediated inhibition of pyruvate
dehydrogenase, the enzyme that facilitates the entry of pyruvate into mitochondria (see Figure
9.5) (29). The resulting decrease in O usage in mitochondria would explain the observation
2
shown in Figure 17.3, where the PO in skeletal muscle is increased in patients with severe
2
sepsis (30).
The decrease in mitochondrial O consumption in sepsis is not consistent with the observed
2
increase in whole-body O consumption in patients with sepsis. This discrepancy can be resolved
2
by proposing that the increased O consumption in sepsis is a reflection of the marked increase in
2
O consumption that occurs during neutrophil activation (31).
2
ALGrawany
--- Page 307 ---
FIGURE 17.3 Direct measurements of tissue PO in the forearm muscles of healthy volunteers
2
and patients with severe sepsis. The height of the columns represents the mean value for each
group, and the crossbars represent the standard error of the mean. Data from Reference 30.
IMPLICATIONS: The mitochondrial dysfunction in sepsis and septic shock has two very important
implications:
1. Since tissue O levels are not impaired in septic shock, the liberal use of supplemental O to
2 2
promote tissue oxygenation is not justified, and could be harmful (by promoting oxidant
stress).
2. The increase in plasma lactate levels in septic shock is not the result of inadequate tissue
oxygenation. Instead, the emerging paradigm is that lactate production increases during periods
of metabolic stress, where lactate serves as an alternative energy source (see Table 9.6).
Monitoring
The approach to monitoring in patients with clinical shock is described in Chapter 14, but the
following information about septic shock deserves mention.
1. The decrease in mitochondrial O usage in septic shock is associated with a decrease in O
2 2
extraction from the microcirculation (i.e., a decrease in the arteriovenous O saturation
2
difference) As a result, the central venous O saturation (ScvO ) will be inappropriately
2 2
increased, and will be misleading as a measure of the adequacy of O delivery. (Oxygen
2
extraction is described in Chapter 9.)
2. The PCO gap is not influenced by systemic oxygenation, and can be useful for identifying
2
tissue hypoperfusion (see Chapter 14).
3. Although lactate is not a marker of anaerobic metabolism in septic shock, plasma lactate levels
--- Page 308 ---
have prognostic significance (see Figure 9.4), and normalization of lactate levels is an
important goal of management.
Management
The initial management of septic shock is outlined in Table 17.2, using recommendations from
the most recent clinical practice guidelines (32).
Volume Resuscitation
Volume infusion should be the initial interventi