MARINO 5TH ED — CH27_VENTILATION
Start page: 481
============================================================

--- Page 481 ---
Chapter 27
Conventional Mechanical Ventilation
Medicine is a science which has been more laboured than advanced.
For I find much iteration, but small addition.
Sir Francis Bacon (a)
The earliest ventilators (introduced in the late 1920s) were negative pressure chambers known as
iron lungs that enclosed the patient from the neck to the ankles. These behemoths (early models
weighed about a ton) were the sole means of ventilatory support until the polio epidemic in the
1950’s, when the demand for assisted ventilation exceeded the supply of iron lungs. In
Copenhagen, Denmark, tracheostomies were introduced, and medical students worked in 8 hour
shifts as human ventilators, manually inflating the lungs of afflicted patients (1). In Boston, the
local Emerson Company had a prototype device for positive pressure lung inflations, which was
put to use at the Massachusetts General Hospital, and became an instant success.
Fast forward about 70 years, and there are estimated 174 different modes of ventilation (2).
However, only one has shown evidence of improved clinical outcomes (3,4), and only because it
limits the lung damage produced by positive pressure ventilation (see Chapter 24). What this
means is that mechanical ventilation is much more complicated than it needs to be, and that “less
is better” with this form of support.
This chapter describes the basic methods of positive pressure ventilation. Although far fewer
than the bloated number of available methods, they will provide effective ventilatory support for
most (if not all) of your patients.
THE VENTILATOR BREATH
There are two basic methods of positive-pressure lung inflation. These are summarized below,
and are illustrated in Figure 27.1.
1. Volume-control ventilation, where the desired inflation volume (tidal volume) is preselected.
The gas is delivered at a constant flow rate, and there is a steady rise in volume and airway
pressure until the target volume is reached. Exhalation is then passive.
2. Pressure-control ventilation, where the desired inflation pressure is preselected. In this case,
--- Page 482 ---
the inspiratory flow rate has a decelerating pattern, with the peak flow rate in the initial phase
of inspiration, and the flow rate then decreasing to zero by the end of inspiration. Because of
this flow profile, the increments in lung volume and airway pressure are greater in the early
phase of inspiration. The desired (peak) pressure is reached early, and a preselected inspiratory
time then determines the end of inspiration. Exhalation occurs passively.
FIGURE 27.1 Changes in lung volume, airway pressure, and flow rate during a single ventilator
breath using volume control and pressure control methods of lung inflation. I = inspiration, E =
expiration. See text for further explanation.
All variables (i.e., volume, pressure, and flow) are recorded and displayed by the ventilator, but
the measurements are made at the level of the endotracheal tube, and may not reflect conditions
in the distal airspaces (the alveoli). In addition, the airway pressures are measured as
transthoracic pressures (i.e., airway pressure relative to atmospheric pressure), and are
influenced by both the lungs and the chest wall. The measurement of transpulmonary pressure
(i.e., airway pressure relative to pleural pressure) eliminates the influence of the chest wall, but
requires an esophageal balloon to measure the intrapleural pressure.
Volume Control
Volume-control ventilation (VCV) delivers a preselected tidal volume at a constant flow rate,
and the peak airway pressure (Ppeak), is determined by the mechanical properties (resistance and
elastance) of the lungs and chest wall. This can be expressed as follows:
ALGrawany
--- Page 483 ---
Ppeak = Pres + Pel (27.1)
where Pres is the pressure attributed to airflow resistance in the airways, and Pel is the pressure
attributed to the elastic recoil force of the lungs and chest wall (elastance). (Note: Elastance is the
resistance of an object to being deformed.)
The Plateau Pressure
The relative contributions of resistance and elastance to the peak airway pressure can be
identified by briefly occluding the ventilator circuit at the end of lung inflation (5). This
“inflation-hold” maneuver is illustrated in Figure 27.2. The peak pressure decreases initially
during the inflation hold, and then reaches a constant plateau pressure until the occlusion is
released and exhalation proceeds. Since there is no airflow during the inflation hold maneuver,
the plateau pressure is equivalent to the pressure in the alveoli (Palv), and this is the pressure
generated by the elastic recoil force of the lungs and chest wall (Pel): i.e.,
Pplateau = Palv = Pel (27.2)
(Note: Positive end-expiratory pressure or PEEP is used commonly during mechanical
ventilation, as described later, and this must be subtracted from the plateau pressure to obtain the
actual alveolar pressure.) The difference between the peak and plateau pressures is then the
pressure needed to overcome the resistance to airflow (Pres): i.e.,
(Ppeak – Pplateau) = Pres (27.3)
FIGURE 27.2 Airway pressure profile for a volume-controlled lung inflation with a brief end-
inspiratory occlusion (inflation-hold). Ppeak is the peak airway pressure, Pplateau is the end-
inspiratory occlusion pressure, Palv is the alveolar pressure, Pres is the pressure attributed to
airway resistance, and Pel is the pressure attributed to the elastic recoil force of the lungs and
chest wall. See text for explanation.
--- Page 484 ---
RISK OF ALVEOLAR INJURY: The peak airway pressure is higher with VCV than with pressure
control ventilation (see Figure 27.1), and there is a misconception that this increases the risk of
alveolar rupture. However, this risk is a function of the alveolar pressure; i.e., the plateau
pressure. Clinical studies indicate that the risk of alveolar rupture is negligible if the alveolar
pressure (plateau pressure) is ≤30 cm H O (2,4), and this is one of the major goals of lung
2
protective ventilation (2), which is described later (see Table 27.1).
Advantages
The major advantage of VCV is the ability to maintain a constant tidal volume despite changes in
the mechanical properties of the lungs. This is especially important for limiting the tidal volumes
used during mechanical ventilation, which is the basis of lung protective ventilation.
Disadvantages
The constant inspiratory flow rate during VCV creates two potential disadvantages. First, the
duration of inspiration is relatively short, and this can lead to uneven alveolar filling. Second, the
maximum inspiratory flow is limited when flow is constant; as a result the inspiratory flow rate
can be inadequate for patients with high ventilatory demands. A decelerating flow pattern is
available for VCV, and has been shown to improve patient comfort (6).
Pressure Control
With pressure control ventilation (PCV), the desired inflation pressure is preselected, and a
decelerating inspiratory flow rate provides high flows at the onset of the lung inflation, to attain
the desired inflation pressure quickly. The inspiratory time is adjusted to allow enough time for
the inspiratory flow rate to fall to zero at the end of inspiration. Since there is no airflow at the
end of the inspiration, the end-inspiratory airway pressure is equivalent to the alveolar pressure.
Advantages
The major advantage of PCV is the increased patient acceptance and reduced risk of ventilatory
asynchrony when compared to VCV (7). This advantage is attributed to the high initial flow rates
and the longer duration of inspiration with PCV.
Disadvantages
The major disadvantage with PCV is the change in tidal volume that occurs with changes in
airway resistance or lung elastance, since this can increase the risk of alveolar overdistension and
ventilator-induced lung injury (see Chapter 24). However, this disadvantage is corrected with the
adaptive mode of ventilation described next.
Pressure-Regulated, Volu