MARINO 5TH ED — CH39_LIVER
Start page: 658
============================================================

--- Page 658 ---
Chapter 39
Liver Failure
Intellectually, we stand on an islet in the midst of an illimitable ocean
of inexplicability. Our business . . . is to reclaim a little more land.
T.H. Huxley (a)
The management of patients with liver failure is a particular challenge because of the numerous
life-supporting functions that are lost when the liver fails. These include: (a) the production of
about 20,000 proteins, including all the coagulation factors and transport proteins in blood, (b)
the metabolism of innumerable endogenous and exogenous substances, and (c) the removal of
microbes that breach the mucosal barrier in the GI tract.
This chapter describes the major problems that prompt ICU admission in patients with liver
failure, and includes the problems associated with both acute liver failure (with no prior history
of liver disease) and decompensated cirrhosis. This is an expansive topic that is only briefly
described here, and a number of clinical practice guidelines are included in the bibliography at
the end of the chapter (1–5).
ACUTE LIVER FAILURE
Acute liver failure (ALF) is an abrupt and rapid deterioration in liver function that occurs de
novo, without prior liver disease. This is an uncommon condition, as demonstrated in Figure 39.1
by the number of cases (2,614) recorded in the United States over a period of 20 years (6).
Etiologies
The conditions included in Figure 39.1 were responsible for about 80% of cases of ALF in the
United States, and acetaminophen tops the list by a great margin.
Acetaminophen
Acetaminophen is the leading cause of ALF in both the United States and the United Kingdom
(being responsible for 46% and 64% of cases, respectively) (6). Acetaminophen hepatotoxicity is
described in detail in Chapter 52, and is only briefly reviewed here. The source of the liver injury
is depletion of hepatic glutathione stores, which results in oxidative cell injury from an
ALGrawany
--- Page 659 ---
acetaminophen metabolite. (Glutathione is the major intracellular antioxidant in the body, as
described in Chapter 25.) The liver injury can begin as early as 12 hours after ingestion, and it
peaks in 3 to 5 days (7). The laboratory abnormalities in the early stages of injury are
characterized by high alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels, with only mild increases in
bilirubin (6). Acetaminophen-induced liver injury has two unfortunate features:
FIGURE 39.1 Causes of acute liver failure recorded by the United States Adult Acute Liver
Failure Registry over the time period from Jan, 1998 to March, 2019. Adapted from Reference 6.
1. About half of acetaminophen overdoses are unintentional (7), and are the result of attempts to
alleviate pain. This is partly due to consumer ignorance about the potential toxicity of
acetaminophen, and is partly due to the inclusion of acetaminophen in more than 600 over-the-
counter products.
2. Acetaminophen is undetectable in the plasma in about 50% of the cases where it causes liver
injury (8). This creates a risk of missed diagnoses and poor outcomes, since the condition is
treatable.
N-ACETYLCYSTEINE: The antidote for acetaminophen hepatotoxicity is N-acetylcysteine (NAC),
which acts as a glutathione surrogate (see Figure 25.7). It is usually given intravenously (see
Chapter 52 for the dosing regimen), and is started as soon as an acetaminophen overdose is
confirmed or suspected. It is most effective when treatment is started within 10 hours of
ingestion (7), and the efficacy declines with time thereafter. However, NAC is started at any time
after a suspected or confirmed overdose of acetaminophen, and treatment is continued until there
is evidence of improvement in liver function. About 75% of cases resolve without the need for
liver transplantation (6).
--- Page 660 ---
The success of NAC in acetaminophen-induced ALF has led to its use in cases of ALF that
are not linked to acetaminophen. Although there is no convincing evidence of benefit (9), it is
considered reasonable to use NAC empirically in ALF of undetermined etiology (10).
Other Drugs
The drugs that have been reported to cause acute liver injury are listed in Table 39.1 (11). Drug-
induced liver injury can be dose-related or idiosyncratic, and is more likely to occur in patients
who are elderly, debilitated, or alcoholic. The idiosyncratic reactions are the most troublesome,
with a survival rate of only 40% without liver transplantation (6).
TABLE 39.1 Drugs Associated with Acute Liver Failure†
Dose-Related Idiosyncratic
Acetaminophen Amiodarone§
Amiodarone§ Amoxicillin
Antimetabolites Dantrolene
Antiretroviral Drugs Halothane
Cyclosporine Lisinopril
Statins§ Phenytoin
Valproic Acid Statins§
Sulfonamides
†For a more complete list, see References 6 and 11.
§Hepatic injury can be dose-related or idiosyncratic.
Ischemic Injury
Ischemic liver injury (sometimes called ischemic hepatitis), typically follows a period of
systemic hypoperfusion (e.g., from hemorrhagic shock), and is characterized by very high
transaminase levels (e.g., >3,000 IU/L) with only mild increases in bilirubin (<5 mg/dL) (6).
This condition tends to resolve if the hypoperfusion resolves, but about 25% of cases need liver
transplantation (6).
Acute Hepatitis
Autoimmune hepatitis has a more insidious onset than the other sources of ALF, and the
diagnosis often rests on a clinical history of autoimmune disease, or positive serologies (e.g.,
antinuclear antibodies or anti-smooth muscle antibodies). About 80% of cases are in women (6),
and hypergammaglobulinemia is common.
Viral hepatitis is responsible for <10% of cases of ALF in developed countries (5). Most
cases are caused by the hepatitis B virus, which can be a new infection, or a latent infection that
is sparked by immunosuppressive therapy. Once liver failure develops, treatment (with
nucleoside analogues) is of little value (12), and survival is only 25% without liver
transplantation (6).
Other Causes
Causes of ALF that are not included in Figure 39.1 include the HELLP syndrome (hemolysis,
elevated liver enzymes and low platelets in pregnant and post-partum women), Budd Chiari
ALGrawany
--- Page 661 ---
syndrome (hepatic vein occlusion), other viral infections (e.g., herpes simplex), and infiltrating
neoplasms (6).
Clinical Features
Unlike the liver failure associated with cirrhosis, ALF is not accompanied by ascites or bleeding
from esophageal varices. Instead, the clinical picture is dominated by systemic inflammation
(originating from the damaged liver) with hemodynamic instability and multiorgan dysfunction
(similar to inflammatory shock, as described in Chapter 17).
Hemodynamics
The hemodynamic instability in ALF is due to vasodilation, and an ineffective circulating blood
volume from hypoalbuminemia (10). The management involves volume resuscitation and
vasopressors if needed, and albumin is recommended as the resuscitation fluid, especially when
the serum albumin is below 3 g/dL (2). Albumin is available as a 5% solution that has an
albumin concentration of 5 g/dL (similar to the normal concentration in plasma), and about 70%
of the infused solution will remain in the intravascular space (see Figure 10.1). The use of
Ringer’s lactate is not advised because it promotes hyponatremia, which will exacerbate the
cerebral edema in hepatic encephalopathy.
Acute Kidney Injury
Acute kidney injury (AKI) is reported in 70% of patients with ALF, and is usually seen in
patients with acetaminophen hepatotoxicity, or those with hypotension who require vasopressors
(13). Renal replacement therapy is used more aggressively in ALF because it protects against
hepatic encephalopathy by removing ammonia as well as excess volume (see next).
Hepatic Encephalopathy
Encephalopathy is the dominant feature of acute liver failure, and is characterized by cerebral
edema (as shown in Figure 39.2).
--- Page 662 ---
FIGURE 39.2 CT images of the head in a patient with acute liver failure, taken before (image on
the left) and after (image on the