MARINO 5TH ED — CH45_CONSCIOUSNESS
Found at page: 732
============================================================

--- Page 732 ---
Chapter 45
Disorders of Consciousness
I think, therefore I am.
René Descartes (1644)
The ability to recognize and interact with the surroundings (i.e., consciousness) is the sine qua
non of the life experience, and loss of this ability is one of the dominant (and dreaded) signs of a
life-threatening illness. This chapter describes the major disorders of consciousness that you will
encounter in the ICU, with emphasis on delirium, coma, and the ultimate disorder of
consciousness, brain death.
ALTERED CONSCIOUSNESS
Consciousness has two components: arousal and awareness.
1. Arousal is the ability to experience your surroundings, and is also known as wakefulness.
2. Awareness is the ability to understand your relationship to your surroundings, and is also
known as responsiveness.
These two components can be used to classify the altered states of consciousness, as indicated in
Table 45.1 (1–3).
TABLE 45.1 Altered States of Consciousness
Can be Awakened and is Can be Awakened but is Not
Aware Aware Cannot be Awakened and is Not Aware
Anxiety Delirium Coma
Lethargy Dementia Brain Death
Locked-In State Psychosis
Stupor
Vegetative State
ALGrawany
--- Page 733 ---
Altered States of Consciousness
The principal states of altered consciousness are as follows:
1. Anxiety and lethargy are conditions where arousal and awareness are intact, but there is a
change in attentiveness (i.e., the degree of awareness).
2. A locked-in state is a condition where arousal and awareness are intact, but there is almost total
absence of motor responsiveness. This condition is caused by bilateral injury to the motor
pathways in the ventral pons, which disrupts all voluntary movements except up-down ocular
movements and eyelid blinking (3).
3. Delirium and dementia are conditions where arousal is intact, but awareness is altered. The
change in awareness can be fluctuating (with delirium) or permanent (with dementia).
4. Stupor is a condition where the subject is difficult to arouse, and is unaware of some or all
elements in the environment.
5. A vegetative state is a condition where there is some degree of arousal (eyes can open), but
there is no awareness. Spontaneous movements and motor responses to deep pain can be
present, but the movements are purposeless. After one month, this condition is called a
persistent vegetative state (4).
6. Coma is the total absence of arousal and awareness (i.e., unarousable unawareness). Like the
vegetative state, spontaneous movements and motor responses to deep pain can be present, but
the movements are purposeless.
7. Brain death is similar to coma in that there is a total absence of arousal and awareness.
However, brain death differs from coma in two ways: (a) it involves loss of all brainstem
function, including cranial nerve responses, and spontaneous respirations and (b) it is always
irreversible.
--- Page 734 ---
FIGURE 45.1 Common sources of altered consciousness in ICU patients.
Predisposing Conditions
There are an innumerable number of conditions that can alter consciousness, and Figure 45.1
shows a list of the most likely ones in critically ill patients. In a general medical-surgical ICU,
the prominent causes of altered consciousness are likely to include the following:
1. Sedation during mechanical ventilation.
2. Clinical shock syndromes.
3. Encephalopathies (ischemic, septic, and metabolic).
4. Drug overdoses or withdrawal.
It is worth mentioning that nonconvulsive seizures are an often overlooked cause of altered
consciousness in ICU patients. (See Chapter 46 for more on this topic.)
DELIRIUM
The delirium described in this section is a manifestation of “brain dysfunction”, which is one part
of the multiorgan dysfunction that plagues critically ill patients. The incidence of this type of
delirium is about 25–50%, and it is especially common in elderly and ventilator-dependent
patients (5). The delirium that is associated with alcohol withdrawal is a separate entity, and is
described in a later section.
ALGrawany
--- Page 735 ---
Clinical Features
The clinical features of delirium are summarized in Figure 45.2 (6,7). As indicated, delirium is a
state of inattentiveness (i.e., inability to focus) that has a rapid onset or a rapidly fluctuating
course (i.e., changes occur within a 24-hour time period), and is accompanied by either
disordered thinking (i.e., incoherent or illogical responses) or an altered level of consciousness
(hyperactive or lethargic).
Three types of ICU-related delirium are recognized: (a) hyperactive delirium, where the
patient is restless and agitated, (b) hypoactive delirium, where the patient is lethargic and
somnolent; and (c) mixed delirium, where there are alternating episodes of hyperactive and
hypoactive delirium. Hypoactive delirium is the most common form (5), and is often overlooked
because of the popular misperception that delirium is a state of severe agitation.
Predisposing Conditions
Any condition that is associated with an encephalopathy can be a source of delirium. The major
ones in the ICU are sepsis, liver failure, uremia, and the use of sedative-hypnotic drugs (5).
SEDATION: The use of heavy and prolonged sedation is considered a risk factor for delirium (8),
and benzodiazepines are considered the principal sedatives that promote delirium in the ICU
(9,10). As a result, avoidance of benzodiazepines is considered an important preventive measure
for ICU-related delirium (10).
Diagnosis
Validated screening tools are considered essential for the detection of delirium (5), and the
Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU (CAM-ICU) is probably the most popular of these
diagnostic tools (6,7). A summary of the CAM-ICU method is included in Appendix II at the end
of the book.
Delirium versus Dementia
Delirium and dementia are distinct mental disorders that can be confused because they have
overlapping clinical features (i.e., attention deficits and disordered thinking). However, delirium
has two characteristics that distinguish it from dementia: i.e., the acute onset and fluctuating
course.
Psychosis versus Delirium
Delirium can be difficult to distinguish from psychosis. Over 40% of hospitalized patients with
delirium have psychotic symptoms (e.g., visual hallucinations) (11), and delirium has been given
the misnomer of “ICU psychosis” (12).
Management
No drug has proven effective in preventing or correcting ICU-related delirium, and drugs are
recommended only to restore calm in severely agitated patients (which is not treating the
underlying delirium) (5,10). The drugs that can be used for this purpose are included in Table
45.2. Dexmedetomidine is the preferred agent (10), but can produce troublesome bradycardia
and hypotension (see Chapter 6). Haloperidol is a popular agent for hyperactive delirium (see
--- Page 736 ---
Chapter 6), but has a relatively slow onset of action (which can be a disadvantage in severely
agitated patients). Ziprasidone is an atypical antipsychotic agent that can be only be given
intramuscularly, but this can be advantageous when intravenous access is problematic in a
severely agitated patient (13).
FIGURE 45.2 The clinical features of delirium in critically ill patients.
TABLE 45.2 Drugs for Severe Agitation in ICU-Related Delirium
ALGrawany
--- Page 737 ---
Drug Recommendations
Dexmedetomidine Dosing: Loading dose (optional) is 1 μg/kg IV over 10 min. followed by an infusion of 0.2–1.5
μg/kg/hr.
Comment: Can produce bradycardia and hypotension. A withdrawal syndrome (with
hyperexcitability) has been reported.
Haloperidol Dosing: Start with 5 mg IV as a bolus dose. If no effect after 15 min, double the dose (10 mg
IV), or switch to another agent. For maintenance dosing, use 25% of the initial
effective dose every 6 hrs.
Comment: Has a relatively slow onset of action. Not advised if the corrected QT interval is
>500 msec.
Ziprasidone Dosing: 10 mg IM every 2 hrs, or 20 mg IM every 4 hrs, to a total daily dose of 40 mg.
Comment: The IM route can be useful if