MARINO 5TH ED — CH52_OVERDOSES
Found at page: 841
============================================================

--- Page 841 ---
Chapter 52
Pharmaceutical Drug Overdoses
A desire to take medicine is, perhaps, the great feature which
distinguishes man from other animals.
Sir William Osler (a)
Prescription drug use in the United States is commonplace, (see Figure 52.1), indicating that
man’s desire to take drugs may be matched by physicians’ desire to prescribe them, and this may
explain, at least in part, why deaths from drug overdoses have increased more than 5-fold in the
past 20-odd years (from 20,000 deaths in the year 2000, to 108,000 deaths in 2022) (1). This
chapter describes some of the more frequent or more problematic pharmaceutical drug
overdoses, including intoxications from acetaminophen, benzodiazepines, β-blockers, opioids,
and salicylates. You won’t have to spend much time in an ICU to encounter one of these
overdoses.
--- Page 842 ---
FIGURE 52.1 Prescription drug use in the United States, 2015–2018, by age group. Data from
the National Center for Health Statistics, Health United States, 2019: Table 039. Hyattsville, MD,
2019. Available from www.cdc.gov/nchs/hus/data-finder.htm (Accessed 7/16/2024).
ACETAMINOPHEN
Acetaminophen is a ubiquitous, over-the-counter analgesic-antipyretic agent that is included in
over 600 commercial drug preparations. It is also a hepatotoxin, and is the leading cause of acute
liver failure in North America, Europe, and Australia (2). In the United States, acetaminophen is
responsible for almost half of the cases of acute liver failure (see Figure 39.1) (3), and about half
of the overdoses are unintentional (4). In 2011, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
issued a mandate for more prominent labeling of the risks of acetaminophen hepatotoxicity,
along with a requirement that prescription acetaminophen products be limited to 325 mg per
dosage (5). Unfortunately, this mandate has had little impact on the prevalence of acute liver
failure from acetaminophen. (See A FINAL WORD for more on this issue.)
ALGrawany
--- Page 843 ---
FIGURE 52.2 The hepatic metabolism of acetaminophen. See text for explanation.
Toxic Mechanism
The toxicity of acetaminophen is related to its metabolism in the liver, and the metabolic
pathways are shown Figure 52.2. The bulk of acetaminophen metabolism involves the formation
of nontoxic sulfate and glucuronide conjugates, which are excreted in the urine. About 10% of
the metabolism involves the oxidation of acetaminophen by a cytochrome P450 oxidase group of
enzymes to form a toxic metabolite that is capable of lethal cell injury. When the daily dose of
acetaminophen is not excessive, the toxic metabolite is removed by conjugation with the cysteine
moiety in glutathione, the major intracellular antioxidant. (Note: Glutathione is a tripeptide that
is composed of cysteine. glutamine, and glycine.) When the daily dose of acetaminophen is
excessive (i.e., above 4 grams/day), the nontoxic conjugation pathway becomes saturated, which
diverts acetaminophen metabolism to the pathway with the toxic metabolite. The increased
traffic in this pathway begins to deplete glutathione reserves, and when glutathione levels fall by
70%, the toxic acetaminophen metabolite accumulates and causes hepatocellular injury (3).
Toxic Dose
--- Page 844 ---
1. The toxic dose of acetaminophen can vary in individual patients, but is somewhere between 7.5
and 15 grams daily in most adults (6,7). Many poison control centers use 10 grams as a
threshold dose that requires further investigation (8). However, certain conditions can increase
the susceptibility to acetaminophen hepatotoxicity (see next section).
2. According to the FDA, the maximum dose of acetaminophen that is safe in adults is 4 grams
per day (9). However, some clinical practice guidelines recommend that for chronic
acetaminophen use, the daily dose should not exceed 3 grams (10).
Predisposing Conditions
The following conditions can increase the risk of liver damage from acetaminophen. In the
presence of these conditions, a daily acetaminophen dose of >4 grams should be considered as
potentially toxic (8).
1. Malnutrition, or prolonged periods of fasting, are recognized risk factors because of the
potential for depletion of hepatic glutathione stores.
2. Patients with chronic alcohol use disorder are at increased risk of acetaminophen
hepatotoxicity, even when daily acetaminophen doses are below the recommended safe level
(i.e., <4 grams daily) (11). This is likely due to the ability of alcohol to increase the activity of
the cytochrome P450 enzyme, plus the possible contribution of glutathione depletion from
poor nutrition.
3. Patients with chronic liver disease are also considered high risk for acetaminophen
hepatotoxicity (8), although the evidence for this is not convincing (12).
4. Drugs that stimulate cytochrome P450 activity can increase the risk of liver damage from
acetaminophen. These drugs include anticonvulsants (carbamazepine and phenytoin) and
antituberculosis drugs (INH and rifampin) (12). Opioids can also increase the risk by
competing for the nontoxic conjugation pathway, thereby diverting acetaminophen metabolism
toward the production of the toxic metabolite (12).
Clinical Presentation
The clinical presentation of acetaminophen hepatotoxicity can be divided into three stages:
1. Stage 1 (First 24 hours): Symptoms are absent or nonspecific (e.g., nausea, vomiting, malaise),
and there may be no evidence of hepatic injury.
2. Stage 2 (24–72 hours): Hepatic aminotransferases (aspartate aminotransferase [AST], alanine
aminotransferase, [ALT]) begin to rise at 24 hours, and can reach levels of 10,000 IU/L (13).
Signs of progressive hepatic injury (e.g., jaundice and prolonged INR) begin to appear, and
there may be signs of renal impairment.
3. Stage 3 (72–96 hours): The hepatic injury peaks at 72–96 hours (12). Hepatic encephalopathy
may be evident at this time, along with progressive lactic acidosis and acute, oliguric renal
failure. Death from multiorgan failure usually occurs at this time.
Risk Assessment
The evaluation of acetaminophen overdoses must include the following: (a) the time and dose
ALGrawany
--- Page 845 ---
ingested, (b) the type of ingestion (acute overdose versus unintentional supratherapeutic dosing),
(c) the drug preparation (immediate vs. extended release), (d) the presence of predisposing
conditions, and (e) evidence of hepatic injury. If an overdose presents within 24 hours of
ingestion of an immediate-release preparation, the plasma acetaminophen level can identify the
need for antidotal therapy.
FIGURE 52.3 Nomogram for predicting the risk of hepatotoxicity according to the plasma
acetaminophen level between 4 and 24 hours after ingestion. See text for explanation.
Nomogram redrawn from Reference 14.
Predictive Nomogram
Plasma acetaminophen levels obtained from 4 to 24 hours after an acute drug ingestion can be
used to predict the risk of hepatotoxicity using the nomogram in Figure 52.3 (14). If the plasma
level is above the treatment line (which extends from 150 μg/mL at 4 hrs, to 5 μg/mL at 24 hrs),
the risk of hepatotoxicity is high enough to warrant antidotal therapy with N-acetylcysteine. If
the plasma level is above the high-risk line (from 300 μg/mL at 4 hrs, to 10 μg/mL at 24 hrs),
there is a 90% chance of developing hepatotoxicity, and these cases may require extended
treatment with N-acetylcysteine (see later).
The predictive nomogram is useful only for acute ingestions that can be accurately timed. If
an extended-release preparation was ingested and the plasma acetaminophen level is not above
--- Page 846 ---
the treatment line at 4–12 hours after ingestion, a repeat level should be obtained after another 4–
6 hours (14). For repeated supratherapeutic ingestions, plasma levels do not predict the risk of
hepatotoxicity, and evaluating risk can be challenging.
N-Acetylcysteine
Glutathione does not readily cross cell membranes, so exogenous glutathione is not a viable
treatment option for acetaminophen hepat