MARINO 5TH ED — CH6_SEDATION
Found at page: 103
============================================================

--- Page 103 ---
Chapter 6
Analgesia and Sedation in the ICU
To cure sometimes, to relieve often, and to comfort always.
Edward Livingston Trudeau, MD (1848−1915)
Contrary to popular perception, our principal function is not to save lives (since this is
impossible on a consistent basis), but rather to relieve pain and suffering, and the ICU is the
flagship of pain and suffering in hospitalized patients. In surveys of patients who have been
discharged from the ICU, anxiety and unrelieved pain are the dominant recollections of the ICU
stay (1). While it is not possible to completely eliminate the unpleasantness of the ICU stay,
attention to patient comfort is always warranted, and surveys like one in Figure 6.1 (2) indicate
that there is much work to be done.
This chapter describes the pharmacological approach to pain and stress relief in the ICU,
with a focus on intravenous drug regimens and recommendations from expert commentaries on
the subject (3−7). Nonpharmacological measures are not included here, but are available in a
clinical practice guideline listed at the end of the chapter (4).
THE ICU EXPERIENCE
It is axiomatic to state that the ICU stay is a stressful experience for patients. Several stressors
have been identified, including unrelieved pain and anxiety, dyspnea, the inability to
communicate (in intubated patients), and disrupted sleep. The stress of a prolonged ICU stay can
have far-reaching neuropsychiatric consequences, as post-traumatic stress disorder has been
reported in patients who required prolonged periods of mechanical ventilation (8).
Pain in The ICU
Unrelieved pain is the most frequently cited stressor in the ICU (9), and the frequency of painful
experiences is equivalent in surgical and medical ICUs (10).
Altered Pain Perception
Pain is generally defined as an unpleasant sensory experience (11). The degree of this
unpleasantness (i.e., pain intensity) varies with the type and strength of the nociceptive (pain
--- Page 104 ---
producing) stimulus, and is also influenced by the presence and severity of disease. This latter
condition applies to critically ill patients, as summarized in the following statements:
1. The sensation of pain is magnified in critically ill patients, and this condition of
hypernociception can transform a minor event into a painful experience.
2. A common source of pain in ICU patients is the simple act of being turned in bed (9), and
about 50% of patients experience pain at rest (usually in the lower back and legs), in the
absence of a noxious stimulus (4,9,10).
3. The heightened pain sensation in critically ill patients is attributed to systemic inflammation
(via the production of prostenoids) and prolonged immobility.
Failure to recognize the exaggerated pain sensation in ICU patients is a source of inadequate
pain control. However, this can be corrected with the use of pain assessment tools, like the ones
described next.
FIGURE 6.1 Percentage of resident physicians and ICU nurses who answered incorrectly when
asked if diazepam (Valium) relieves pain.
Monitoring Pain
Routine assessments of pain intensity can be used to guide analgesic therapy. Because pain is a
subjective sensation, the patient’s self-assessment is the most accurate measure of pain intensity.
1. When patients are capable of self-assessment, the Numerical Ranking Scale is recommended to
quantify pain intensity (4). This is a horizontal scale with 10 equally spaced divider markings,
numbered 1 (no pain) to 10 (maximum pain). The patient points to the numbered marking that
corresponds to the intensity of pain. A score greater than 3 indicates unacceptable pain.
2. When patients are not capable of self-assessment due to heavy sedation (e.g., during assisted
ventilation), then physical signs can be used to assess pain. This is the basis for the Behavioral
Pain Scale shown in Table 6.1 (12), which includes 12 individual behaviors separated into
ALGrawany
--- Page 105 ---
three categories: facial expression, arm flexion, and tolerance of mechanical ventilation. The
final score ranges from 3 (no pain) to 12 (maximum pain). A score of 6 or higher indicates
unacceptable pain.
Vital Signs
There is a tendency to look for changes in heart rate or blood pressure as evidence of pain, but
this practice should be abandoned, because there is a poor correlation between pain intensity (as
reported by patients) and changes in any of the vital signs (3,4).
TABLE 6.1 The Behavioral Pain Scale
Item Description Score
Facial Expression • Relaxed 1
• Partially tightened 2
• Fully tightened 3
4
• Grimacing
Upper Limbs • No movement 1
• Partially bent 2
• Fully bent, fingers flexed 3
4
• Permanently retracted
Compliance with Ventilation • Tolerating ventilator 1
• Coughing, but tolerating ventilator 2
• Fighting ventilator 3
4
• Unable to control ventilation
Total Score
Score Interpretation
3 No Pain
≥6 Unacceptable pain
12 Maximal pain
From Reference 11.
ANALGESIA WITH OPIOIDS
The drugs described in this section are the most effective analgesics available (and hence the
most popular drugs used for pain relief in the ICU). At the outset, a few definitions deserve
mention:
1. An opiate is a natural chemical derivative of opium.
2. An opioid is a naturally-occurring or synthetic derivative of opium that acts by stimulating
specific receptors (called opioid receptors) in the central nervous system and elsewhere.
Stimulation of opioid receptors produces a variety of effects, including analgesia, sedation,
euphoria, pupillary constriction, respiratory depression, bradycardia, constipation, nausea and
vomiting, urinary retention, and pruritis.
--- Page 106 ---
3. A narcotic is an outdated term for an opioid, but it has also been adopted by law enforcement
agencies to refer to an opioid that is obtained illegally and used for non-medical purposes.
The terms opiate and opioid are often used interchangeably, but opioid is used here because it
is a more accurate term for the drugs included in this section. In addition to their analgesic
effects, opioids have the added benefit of producing mild sedation, but without amnesic effects
(13). All opioids are metabolized in the liver, and the metabolites are excreted in the urine.
Drugs and Dosing Regimens
The opioids used most frequently in the ICU are morphine, fentanyl, and hydromorphone, and
the recommended intravenous dosing for each drug is shown in Table 6.2 (3). It is important to
emphasize that opioid dose requirements can vary widely in individual patients, and therefore the
effective dose of an opioid is determined by each patient’s response, and not by the
recommended dosing of the drug.
TABLE 6.2 Commonly Used Intravenous Opioids
Morphine Hydromorphone Fentanyl
Onset 5–10 min 5–15 min 1–2 min
Bolus Dosing 2–4 mg q 1–2 hr 0.2–0.6 mg q 1–2 hr 0.35–0.5 µg/kg q 0.5–1 hr
Infusion Rate 2–30 mg/hr 0.5–3 mg/hr 0.7–10 µg/kg/hr
PCA 0.5–3 mg 0.1–0.5 mg 15–75 µg
Demand (bolus) Lockout Interval 10–20 min 5–15 min 3–10 min
Lipid Solubility x 0.2x 600x
Active Metabolites Yes Yes No
Histamine Release Yes No No
Dose Adjustment for Renal Failure ↓ 50% None ? Avoid†
Dosing recommendations from Reference 3. †From Reference 5.
Morphine
Morphine is the principal alkaloid of opium, and has been the traditional opioid used for pain
control in the ICU. However, morphine has the following disadvantages that have curbed its
popularity:
1. Morphine has active metabolites that accumulate in renal failure. One metabolite (morphine 3-
glucuronide) can produce agitation with myoclonus and seizures (14), while another metabolite
(morphine-6-glucuronide) has more potent analgesic effects than the parent drug (15). To
avoid accumulation of these metabolites, the maintenance dose of morphine should be reduced
by 50% in patients with renal failure (16).
2. Morphine promotes the release of histamine, which produces systemic vasodilation and a
decrease in blood pressure (17). Hypotension is typically seen in patients with a
ALGrawany
--- Page 107 ---